# mdump

This is a tool to interpet and show information generated by my experimental
changes to OpenBSD's `malloc`. 

Please note that this will only work on a current OpenBSD source tree. At the moment of
writing this that means newer than Oct 12 2020.

First step is to apply the diff to `src/lib/libc/stdlib/malloc.c`, recompile and install libc:
```
$ cd /usr/src/lib/libc
$ patch < malloc.diff
$ make obj
$ make
$ doas make install
```
After this, `malloc` will generate `utrace(2)` records when instructed to do so.

The trace file is generated by running your program with

```
MALLOC_OPTIONS=DT ktrace -tu program
```
The `MALLOC_OPTIONS` instruct `malloc` to write the information and the `ktrace` invocation 
takes care of catching the `utrace` records and writing them to a file, by
default called `ktrace.out`. After that you can use the `mdump` program to
display the information.

Remember to build your program and libraries with debug information.
On OpenBSD system libraries are installed with debug info, so that's
convenient.  To get deeper stack trace information on leaks use
more `T`'s. Note that the mechanism used (`__builtin_return_address`)
is not guaranteed to work for more than one `T`, some executables
on some platforms will crash when too many `T`'s are used.

To compile `mdump`, you'll need to `elftoolchain` package. 
```
# doas pkg_add elftoolchain
$ make obj
$ make
$ doas make install
```
This will install the tool and man page into `/usr/local`.

Basic usage is
```
  mdump
```
to show leak info and
```
  mdump -D
```
to show a dump of `malloc`'s internal state at program exit.

To produce readable stack traces, the program and its libraries should be
compiled with debug information, typically `-g`.
Statically linked programs must be compiled with the
`-nopie` option.
High optimization levels can produce debug information that
`mdump`
cannot interpret.
Setuid or setgid processes can only be traced by the superuser.

Forking programs can be traced by using the `-i` flag to `ktrace(1)`, but
selecting a single process is needed when running `mdump` on the trace file
generated.
     
# An example run
The program:
```
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

char *p;

void f(void)
{
        int i;
        void *s[64];

        p = realloc(p, 4096);
        for (i = 0; i < 64; i++)
                s[i] = malloc(4096);
        p = realloc(p, 8192);
        for (i = 1; i < 64; i++)
                free(s[i]);

}

int main()
{
        int i;

        p = malloc(100);
        for (i = 0; i < 10; i++)
                f();

        printf("done\n");
}
```
Compile, run and show leaks:
```
$ cc -g x.c 
$ MALLOC_OPTIONS=DTTTT ktrace -tu ./a.out 
done
$ mdump
Leak sum=40960 count=10 avg=4096
 f at /home/otto/x.c:13
 main at /home/otto/x.c:25
 ?? at ??:0

Leak sum=8192 count=1 avg=8192
 f at /home/otto/x.c:14
 main at /home/otto/x.c:25
 ?? at ??:0

Leak sum=65536 count=1 avg=65536
 __smakebuf at /usr/src/lib/libc/stdio/makebuf.c:62
 __swsetup at /usr/src/lib/libc/stdio/wsetup.c:75
 __vfprintf at /usr/src/lib/libc/stdio/vfprintf.c:460
 vfprintf at /usr/src/lib/libc/stdio/vfprintf.c:264

$
```

# How does it work?

While running (and if enabled by `MALLOC_OPTIONS`) malloc
stores backtrace information for allocations. 
Per stackframe the return address is recorded.
Any allocation equal or larger than a page is tracked. For smaller allocations,
only a sample is recorded. This means that not all leaks will be shown for smaller allocations.

At program exit, malloc will check which allocations are not freed,
translate the addresses into library/executable plus offset information
using `dladdr(3)` and construct utrace records to send out.

The `mdump` program then takes this information and translates the library
plus offset information into function name + file + linenumber information using
the debug information embedded in the program and its libraries.

